+++
title = "Epistemology naturalized"

date = 2022-05-22
lastmod = 2022-05-22
draft = false

tags = ["philosophy", "epistemology"]
summary = "The implications of Quine's work for the foundations of science"
abstract = "The implications of Quine's work for the foundations of science"
authors = ["Vassilis Kehayas"]
hasPlotly = false
doi = "https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6610265"
sourceFile = "src/epistemology-naturalized.Rmd"

+++
> However far I go in my distrustful attitude, no actual harm will come
> of it, because my project won’t affect how I act, but only how I go
> about acquiring knowledge. \[…\] This will be hard work, though, and a
> kind of laziness pulls me back into my old ways.

([Descartes, 1614](#ref-descartesMeditationsFirstPhilosophy1614), First
Meditation, p. 3)

In this article, I will outline [W. V. O.
Quine’s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Willard_Van_Orman_Quine) thesis
on the development of a naturalistic approach in epistemology and the
related discussion that has emerged from his proposal. I will also
present my views on this venture. The goals of this article are to
explore the limits and necessary conditions of science in general and
neuroscience in particular, but also to assess to what extent the
scientific study of the mind can contribute to the foundation of
scientific practice itself. I chose to enter into such an endeavour
through the reconstitution of Quine’s arguments as formulated mainly in
the articles *“Epistemology Naturalized”* ([Quine,
1969](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)) and *“Two Dogmas of
Empiricism”* ([Quine, 1951](#ref-quineTwoDogmasEmpiricism1951)) and a
selective review of the later literature.

## Introduction

Epistemology is the branch of philosophy that deals with human
knowledge: what it is, how we acquire it and what we have the capacity
know. The specific objective of epistemology is to address the relevant
issues in the context of scientific practice, as this can be considered
the field in which knowledge processes are best discernable but also the
field in which epistemological perspectives have the most concrete
impact. The roots of epistemology can be traced to the oldest
philosophical texts, and certainly to those of Aristotle and Plato.

### Enlightenment

An important development in this field of human thought arose with the
work of [Renè
Descartes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Descartes)
([Descartes, 1614](#ref-descartesMeditationsFirstPhilosophy1614)), who
tried to base all human knowledge on intuition and deductive logic. The
philosophical current in which such theories of knowledge were
articulated is called *intuitionism* or *foundationalism*, which is part
of the wider school of thought of
[*rationalism*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rationalism).

Descartes’ search for the foundations of knowledge emerged from
challenging the established beliefs and the reliability of sensory
experience. [David Hume](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Hume)
approached the same challenge from a different point of view, arguing
that any intuition we have and our ability to reason are equally
susceptible to error as our sensory experience since our interface with
the world is exclusively through the senses. The source of unreliability
is therefore attributed, according to Hume, to basing our intuitions on
our susceptible to error senses. Therefore, Hume’s response leads to a
degree of skepticism as to what we can know. Hume argued that our senses
are the only way we have to know the world and that is enough for our
usual needs, as long as the world is uniform and does not change
suddenly ([Salmon et al., 1992, p.
66](#ref-salmonIntroductionPhilosophyScience1992)). Although Hume’s
position was not initially well-received ([Fieser,
2011](#ref-fieserHumeMetaphysicalEpistemological2011); [Losee,
2001](#ref-loseeHistoricalIntroductionPhilosophy2001)), it now holds an
important place in the history of philosophy. The current that formed
from this thesis is called
[*empiricism*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empiricism).

The problem of deriving our intuitions from empirical observations is
known as the *problem of induction*. The ontological component of the
problem of induction concerns the fact that the concept of causality
does not appear to exist in the world independent of the agent doing the
reasoning; even the most stereotypical interaction between objects in
the real world could evolve differently in some repetition, without us
being able to distinguish the reason for this deviation. The question of
discerning which processes we use to acquire knowledge forms the
methodological component of the issue.

The next important milestone to the subject was the contribution of
[Immanuel Kant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immanuel_Kant). Kant
argued that we can have no sensory experience without the contribution
of the mind. It is in the unchanging and universal *a priori* properties
of the mind that we must focus our attention on to produce reliable
judgements and beliefs about the world. He even suggested a series of *a
priori* contributions of the mind to the understanding of the world,
which largely derive their origin from the work of Aristotle
([McCormick, 2020](#ref-mccormickImmanuelKantMetaphysics2020)). He
believed that these properties of the mind could be deduced using formal
logic and that in combination with the innate spatio-temporal perception
as well as higher logic, they can jointly enable the knowledge of the
world and the construction of a coherent system of knowledge ([Losee,
2001, pp. 96–97](#ref-loseeHistoricalIntroductionPhilosophy2001)).
Kant’s view was influenced by Euclidean geometry and Newton’s mechanics
([Losee, 2001, p. 97](#ref-loseeHistoricalIntroductionPhilosophy2001)),
and he likened his achievement to the contribution of the Copernican
revolution ([McCormick,
2020](#ref-mccormickImmanuelKantMetaphysics2020)).

### 20<sup>*th*</sup> century

Through their efforts to reduce mathematics to formal logic, Gotlöb
Frege and Bertrand Russell devised a systematic language with which they
could address older problems of epistemology. After Einstein’s theory of
relativity challenged the universal validity of Newton’s theory, those
philosophers who followed Frege’s and Russell’s work –the so-called
“Vienna Circle”– made an attempt to use this propositional logic to
dispel any metaphysics from philosophy. This historical turning point is
often referred to as the *“linguistic turn”* in analytic philosophy. Any
observational proposition would now be articulated in terms of formal
logic and would have to be empirically verifiable to be considered
meaningful. This requirement for any proposition to be verifiable to
make sense, i.e. to not be placed in the realm of metaphysics, is known
as the *criterion of verifiability*. The theoretical framework in which
it was articulated is called the [*verification theory of
meaning*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verificationism).

Under this theory it would be possible to build the set of necessary
propositions on which scientific practice could be based. Kant’s
proposed framework would be replaced by the network of logical relations
between observational propositions and the axioms of formal logic. The
scientific propositions would therefore be divided into *analytic* and
*synthetic*, with the former not requiring empirical verification and
being logically self-evident, and the latter being those whose meaning
derives from their empirical verification. The philosophical current
that followed this approach is called [*Logical
Positivism*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_positivism).

The representative of Logical Positivism considered the one that got
closer to the desired achievement was [Rudolf
Carnap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rudolf_Carnap) ([Salmon et al.,
1992, p. 85](#ref-salmonIntroductionPhilosophyScience1992)). More
specifically, Carnap attempted to structure an inductive logic system to
the standards of Frege and Russell’s deductive logic, which would
resolve the induction problem on the solid basis of formal logic. The
main problem he faced was that even if he managed to complete the task
at hand, Carnap would still have to prove the validity of the
verifiability criterion within the system he produced to show how
analytic propositions are supported. But as [Kurt
Gödel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurt_G%C3%B6del) has shown using
Hilbert’s arsenal of formal logic and mathematical formalism, there is
no consistent axiomatic (mathematical) system in which its own
fundamental axioms can be proved. Therefore, for Carnap to succeed, he
would still have to explain the role of analytic propositions in his
system without relying on the verifiability criterion.

### The Carnap-Quine dispute

In his article “Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology” ([Carnap,
1950](#ref-carnapEmpiricismSemanticsOntology1950)), Carnap tries to
support the usefulness of the analytic propositions by separating the
possible questions that could be asked into internal and external in
relation to the system. Internal questions are those that can be
formulated in terms of the system and answered within it; they can be
either empirical questions or questions the answers to which can be
directly derived with the use of logic. External questions, on the other
hand, are those that cannot be explored empirically. A question could
be, for example, “Are there spatio-temporal points?”. If it is
articulated outside the system, its answer is a matter of convention and
pragmatic faith in the system –otherwise, formulated within the system,
its answer is analytic and trivial.

Quine’s critique on Carnap’s project in the much-discussed article “Two
Dogmas of Empiricism” ([Quine, 1951](#ref-quineTwoDogmasEmpiricism1951))
focused on two interconnected points. First, he argued that the attempt
to discriminate between analytic and synthetic sentences is artificial
and vague. Such a distinction can not be supported and is not fruitful,
and therefore is a metaphysical belief –exactly what the empiricists of
the Vienna cycle wanted to avoid. The existence of analyticity becomes
problematic as the analyticity of a sentence cannot be verified.
Therefore, the criterion of verifiability, which is the cornerstone of
Logical Positivism, cannot be applied. Quine considers that the doctrine
of analyticity, as he calls it, is directly related to the second
doctrine of Logical Positivism he identifies, that of reductionism. He
even claims that the two doctrines are identical and that we are
necessarily led from one to the other if we use the criterion of
verifiability. He draws these conclusions by examining the different
avenues that Carnap tried to follow to support the concept of
analyticity: synonymy, direct definition, and explicit semantic rules,
and finds them all equally ineffective and vague. In his view, as long
as one is committed to empiricism one can only accept the confirmatory
empirical observations as the final evidence for a proposition’s degree
of truth.

Quine goes even further and presents a positive counter-proposal: he
argues that “the unit of empirical significance is the whole of science”
([Quine, 1951, p. 39](#ref-quineTwoDogmasEmpiricism1951)). “The totality
of our so-called knowledge or beliefs, from the most casual matters of
geography and history to the profoundest laws of atomic physics or even
pure mathematics and logic, is a man-made fabric which impinges on
experience only along the edges.” ([Quine, 1951, p.
39](#ref-quineTwoDogmasEmpiricism1951)) The above passage presents what
Quine proposed as a replacement for the two doctrines of logical
empiricism –the *doctrine of holism*, which he attributed to Duhem
([Quine, 1969, p. 267](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)).
According to this doctrine, the whole body of our empirical knowledge is
tested with every new observation and no part of it is immune to
revision –every “recalcitrant” observation, such that it is not
compatible with existing knowledge, affects the whole system due to the
interconnections between its parts. Even logic can be revised, if this
is necessary to maintain the balance of this entire web. It is this
interdependence of the components of our empirical knowledge that leads
to the famous *indeterminacy of translation* ([Quine, 1969, p.
267](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)).

In his book “Word and Object” ([Quine, 1960, p.
29](#ref-quineWordObject1960)), Quine compares the problem of the
indeterminacy of translation with the analogous problem faced by the
anthropologist who approaches a previously unknown tribe and tries to
decipher and translate the language of the natives that is completely
foreign for the anthropologist. If the sound of the word “Gavagai!”
coincides with the native indicating the presence of a rabbit that
suddenly jumped out of the bushes, it is reasonable for the
anthropologist to assume that the word corresponds to the word “rabbit!”
in his language. But based on these data alone, there are countless
other equally plausible alternatives. For example, the native could have
meant “a rabbit jumped out of that bush!” or “I told you it was there!”,
or “a spatio-temporal blob of matter!” or simply “food!”. With just this
single observation we cannot ascertain if any of these translations are
correct. But as observations accumulate and as they relate to each
other, possibly also with knowledge of other related languages, as is
usually the case, the more confident we can be for the veracity of
translation.

Therefore, a “recalcitrant” empirical observation only tells us that
something in the way we interpret the world is wrong but does not tell
us what. There is no one-to-one correspondence between experience and
theory and therefore the error can be traced either in the auxiliary
hypotheses or in the foundations of the knowledge system. It is said
that theory is *underdetermined* by experience ([Hylton & Kemp,
2020](#ref-hyltonWillardVanOrman2020)). The only way forward is to make
some arbitrary choices along the way towards the full translation, which
will only be verifiable and correctable based on the observations to
follow. It is also reasonable to assume that concepts form in a similar
way during the development of infants and during the development of
science ([Quine, 1969, p. 81](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)).

### Towards a naturalistic epistemology

If Quine is right to claim that the above analogy between human
development and epistemology holds, this has important consequences
according to him. On the one hand, the possibility of directly reducing
epistemology to logic is ruled out, as an infinite number of
reconstructions are in principle possible. All the advantages that such
a reduction would have (which in the meantime turned into a reduction to
logic in conjunction with set theory, a drastic ontological move
according to him) –the “purity” of logic as reliable and self-evident,
and therefore the explanation of empirical data in clearer terms, the
standardization of scientific explanations, and the possible
simplification of vocabulary– cannot be established ([Quine, 1969, pp.
74–75](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). This observation leads
Quine to note that the work Carnap undertook was supposed to provide a
rational reconstruction, for which we would have no way of determining
whether it was correct. As we have seen above, Carnap has moved away
from such a pursuit by saying that the building blocks of the system are
provided through conventions.

At this point Quine wonders: “But why all this creative reconstruction,
all this make-believe? \[…\] Why not settle for psychology? \[…\] If we
are out simply to understand the link between observation and science,
we are well advised to use any available information, including that
provided by the very science whose link with observation we are seeking
to understand.” ([Quine, 1969, pp.
75–76](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). The consequence for the
fate of epistemology is, according to Quine, the following:
“Epistemology in its new setting, conversely, is contained in natural
science, as a chapter of psychology.” ([Quine, 1969, p.
83](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). Quine, of course,
immediately realizes the circularity of the project. However, he
considers arguments against circularity pointless “once we have stopped
dreaming of deducing science from observations” ([Quine, 1969, p.
76](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). He often likens the project
to [Neurath’s boat](/post/neuraths-boat) ([Quine, 1960, p.
3](#ref-quineWordObject1960); [1969, p.
84](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)); the aim is to reconstruct
the boat while it is already floating in the middle of the sea. For
Quine, the philosopher and the scientist are together on the same boat.
If our goal is the “understanding of science as an institution or
process in the world, and we do not intend that understanding to be any
better than the science which is its object” ([Quine, 1969, p.
84](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)), then it is legitimate for
this interaction to exist.

At the same time, however, he clarifies that: “Such a study could still
include, even, something like the old rational reconstruction, to
whatever degree such reconstruction is practicable; for imaginative
constructions can afford hints of actual psychological processes, in
much the way that mechanical simulations can” ([Quine, 1969, p.
83](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). A picture of a reciprocal
containment emerges: “The old epistemology aspired to contain, in a
sense, natural science; it would construct it somehow from sense data.
Epistemology in its new setting, conversely, is contained in natural
science, as a chapter of psychology. But the old containment remains
valid too, in its way. \[…\] There is thus reciprocal containment,
though containment in different senses: epistemology in natural science
and natural science in epistemology.” ([Quine, 1969, p.
83](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969))

Quine identifies two consequences arising from the above: First, the
problem of epistemological priority is solved, that is, whether
observation –and consequently knowledge– consists of sensory data or its
conscious awareness. Epistemological priority is given to what is
causally closest to the sensory receptors. The problem of
epistemological priority is eliminated as the concept is replaced by
causal proximity ([Quine, 1969, pp.
84–85](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). Second, the notion of
the analyticity of an observational proposition can be replaced by the
degree of its acceptance by the community ([Quine, 1969, p.
86](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). The reference to
subjectivity is generally eliminated as observational propositions will
usually concern natural bodies ([Quine, 1969, p.
87](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)).

If we now want to define in this new context what an observational
proposition is, we can say that it is a proposition “on which all
speakers of the language give the same verdict when given the same
concurrent stimulation. To put the point negatively, an observational
proposition is one that is not sensitive to differences in past
experience within the speech community” ([Quine, 1969, pp.
86–87](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)). Outside the realm of
language, in that of perception there is a rather limited set of
perceptual patterns, “toward which we tend unconsciously to rectify all
perceptions. These, if experimentally identified, could be taken as
epistemological building blocks, the working elements of experience.
They might prove in part to be culturally variable, as phonemes are, and
in part universal.” ([Quine, 1969, p.
90](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)).

### Overview

Quine’s work is considered to have marked the end of Logical Positivism.
Through Carnap’s latest writings and Quine’s writings presented above,
analytic philosophy began moving towards pragmatism. It can be argued
that Quine’s purpose was to save empiricism from the problems that had
begun to emerge. It is clear from his texts that he wishes to maintain
the criterion of verifiability, as we have seen it transform into the
new picture, and he sees, like the empiricists of the Vienna Circle,
physics as the model science for the construction of the new
epistemology.

The metaphysical question that Quine wants to answer is how we know the
world. His position is that this question can be answered through
scientific research. He therefore rejects the metaphysical doctrine of
the existence of some form of *a priori* knowledge. He is led to this
metaphysical position having rejected the usefulness of a distinction
between analytic and synthetic propositions, seeing scientific
methodology as the only alternative approach. Therefore, he considers
that this is an empirical question, which can be answered by the
psychology of his time. It can be summarized as “how we reach what we
call knowledge and even science from the activations of our sensory
receptors”.

As Quine himself acknowledges, the question arises as to whether science
is legitimized to undertake the task by its own means. The debate can be
traced, to some extent, to the disagreement between Kant and Hume over
what we should trust most, our senses or our reasoning. Quine brings
back the dilemma proposing two new facts: first, modern science is
clearly in a better position than in previous centuries to explain the
apparently complex psycho-mental phenomena; second, we have ceased to
seek the absolute certainty that a foundation of knowledge in logic or
anything else ever tested would offer us. We will focus in turn on each
of the critical issues that arise: What does the “naturalization” of
epistemology mean –what does naturalism mean? How does Quine himself
mean it and what other alternatives could be supported? What objections
arise in the first place for the project? What is at stake in this
proposed transition?

## Discussion

### Naturalism

Like any term, the term *naturalism* can carry different meanings,
depending on the user, the purpose of its use and the context in which
it is used. In a first sense, it may be used to indicate, as an
opposition, the aversion to anything “supernatural”. Reality is limited
to anything found in nature –a not-so-informative proposition
([Papineau, 2020](#ref-papineauNaturalism2020); [Stroud,
1996](#ref-stroudCharmNaturalism1996)). Almost anyone would agree with
that. The first naturalists of the twentieth century already used the
term to state that all information is contained in nature and so
everything in it is accessible to the scientific method ([Papineau,
2020](#ref-papineauNaturalism2020)). Based on these, we can distinguish
two components of the term: the ontological, that is, what someone
allows to be included in the “nature” they have in mind, and the
methodological, what are the limits of the naturalistic approach.
Although the two problems are related, we will mainly approach the
latter.

Most philosophers who support the adoption of naturalism in epistemology
seem to agree with the rejection of every *a priori* knowledge and even
every *a priori* epistemological principle ([Kitcher,
1992](#ref-kitcherNaturalistsReturn1992); [Rosenberg,
1996](#ref-rosenbergFieldGuideRecent1996)). The qualification of the
scientific methodology and empirical research follows from there. In
addition, since naturalists denounce every solid foundation, they must
look for processes or properties that are reliable enough to fill in the
role of *a priori* categories and principles (credibility for Kitcher,
evolutionary theory for Rosenberg).

A controversy appears about the weight that the efforts for a scientific
explanation should carry and the relative role of philosophy and
science. We can thus distinguish naturalists to those who argue that
epistemology should be completely replaced by science and those who
argue that a part of the question remains that empirical research cannot
access. This controversy already existed in Quine’s writings.

One can detect both a version of a “strong” naturalistic approach to
epistemology, but also a “moderate” or “weak” approach ([Haack,
1993](#ref-haackTwoFacesQuine1993); [Stich,
1993](#ref-stichNaturalizingEpistemologyQuine1993)). The first equates
to *scientism*, the view that favours science as the best and therefore
only method we should use to discover the world. The second sees science
as complementary to philosophy and possibly as a source for its renewal.

As Haack ([1993](#ref-haackTwoFacesQuine1993)) points out, among others,
this internal conflict in Quine’s writings arises in part from the
different use of the term “science” (or “natural science”). We have
already seen that Quine proposes that the work of epistemology be placed
in the academic field of psychology –this is a view of the scientistic
naturalism that Quine had in mind. But how can one think of the times
when Quine considers philosophy and science to be part of the same
continuum (see the parable of Neurath’s boat) or when he tells us that
“science is self-conscious common sense” ([Quine, 1960, p.
3](#ref-quineWordObject1960))? At other times Quine includes economics,
sociology, and history in the natural sciences ([Hylton & Kemp,
2020](#ref-hyltonWillardVanOrman2020); [Sinclair,
2020](#ref-sinclairWillardVanOrman2020)) while denying, arbitrarily to
many, the contribution of the study of the sociological and historical
aspects of the issue to epistemology ([Quine, 1969, p.
87](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969)).

Disagreements also arise over one’s position regarding the dilemma of
realism versus anti-realism. In simple terms, this dilemma can be
expressed as follows: is the image of the world that science offers us
an accurate representation of the world itself or is it merely an
instrumental conceptual form that we can use to access it? One would
expect that the certainty required to promote the naturalistic approach
as the prevailing epistemological approach would force any proponent to
argue that scientific knowledge provide us an accurate depiction of
reality. But the indeterminacy of translation seems to lead directly to
anti-realism. Since two or more theories may equally well reflect the
incoming empirical observations, which of the possible worlds they
describe is real?

All these disagreements around the degree to which science should be
involved in epistemology stem from the answers that naturalists attempt
to provide to the two perceived deficiencies of naturalism –the argument
from normativity and the argument from circularity– as well as from
differing opinions on the degree of epistemology’s transformation after
the emergence of naturalism. We will now examine whether *a priori*
knowledge is supported assuming a naturalistic approach and the
alternative sources of reliability that can emerge through scientific
research.

#### The argument from circularity

The first flaw that can be directly identified in the naturalistic
approach to epistemology is its circularity. The use of science in the
attempt to explain the phenomenon of knowledge and science itself
involves circularity: it appears to presuppose what is being attempted
to explain. It is tantamount to question-begging and would be
automatically considered condemnatory of any argument: the conclusion of
the argument necessarily follows from one of the premises. To put it
another way, how can one convince Descartes’ Skeptic that the world of
our senses is true as we know it and we are not deceived? To achieve
this (something that would give rise to the foundation of empirical
science with complete certainty) this would have to be done outside the
framework of science, which is itself based on experience.

An answer given to this argument by the supporters of the naturalistic
approach, following Hume, is that in no way can we overcome our
cognitive limitations. There is no way we can guarantee the certainty of
our experience. As we have seen, Quine tells us that the problem no
longer exists, as long as we stop dreaming of a logical reconstruction
of science. The problem can be approached scientifically: “Subtracting
his cues from his world view, we get man’s net contribution as the
difference”. ([Quine, 1960, p. 4](#ref-quineWordObject1960)). Of course,
the findings of science will not have the certainty that Descartes was
aiming for, but science can constantly self-correct.

In addition, according to Gödel’s theorems, a coherent formal system
will either have unjustified initial assumptions or will be circular and
feedback-based ([Sosa,
1983](#ref-sosaNatureUnmirroredEpistemology1983)). Proponents of the
naturalistic approach will tend to prefer the latter. An approach
attempting to base knowledge on logic –or any other property or process–
would be equally doomed to circularity, as it would have to assume
itself before trying to explain how it leads to knowledge.

Furthermore, a circular set of propositions whose circle is large
enough, like a dictionary containing all the words of a language, does
provide some information and cannot be considered a fallacy ([Dowden,
2020](#ref-dowdenFallacies2020)). Something analogous in epistemology
could be to form an as complete as possible dictionary of knowledge
components. Logical Positivism proposed the language of formal logic
(later supplemented by set theory); Quine proposed a change of language
in favour of the language of science, or, in any case, the language
closest to describing the world as it is. And it is to be expected that
language will continue to evolve along the way. It is difficult to see
how the whole of human knowledge can be judged as fallacious the same
way as circular arguments.

Therefore, in relation to the issue of circularity, the two different
approaches seem to be equivalent. In a rational reconstruction, assuming
that one more successful than those already tested can exist, one or
some of the cognitive or other qualities of man (or even human
societies) will be considered the fundamental building blocks on which a
theory of knowledge will based. On the other hand, according to the
naturalistic approach, the equivalent to those foundations (the axioms
of science) will be under constant review as new empirical data emerge.
In the first case, the circle will be closed at the base of the
hierarchy, close to the structural elements, which will be considered
stable and any changes will be made to the elements closest to the
periphery. In the second case, the structural elements can be constantly
revised, as often as needed based on new findings.

#### The argument from normativity

The proponents of the naturalistic approach to epistemology have been
accused of ignoring the normative aspect of epistemology. This aspect
deals with the search for methods and values that should guide our
decision making and our practice, and, in the context of epistemology,
concerns the distinction between right and wrong theories and
propositions. As Rosenberg puts it: “Ethics examines what we ought to
do, epistemology what we ought to believe” ([Rosenberg,
1999](#ref-rosenbergNaturalisticEpistemologyEliminative1999)). Hume was
the first to point out that empirical research findings cannot be
applied indiscriminately. If we do not want to fall into the
naturalistic fallacy, we must separate *is* from *ought*.

Kim ([2008, pp. 540, 542](#ref-kimWhatNaturalizedEpistemology2008))
argues that Quine was the first to propose the removal of the concept of
normativity from epistemology and its transformation from a project
based on justification to an empirical quest now based on a descriptive
science. This transition, Kim points out, also marks the expulsion of
knowledge from epistemology ([Kim, 2008, p.
542](#ref-kimWhatNaturalizedEpistemology2008)), a conclusion with which
Quine himself would have little disagreement. Quine had renounced the
concept of “knowledge” for serious use, along with that of “necessity”,
“thought”, “belief”, “experience”, “meaning” and other terms that he
considered vague, along with the philosophical questions that required
their use because they had no clear boundaries ([Hylton & Kemp,
2020](#ref-hyltonWillardVanOrman2020); [Sober,
2000](#ref-soberQuineElliottSober2000)). Stripped of justification and
normativity, Quine’s undertaking bears no resemblance to epistemology,
the way a traditional epistemologist understands it ([Kim, 2008, p.
543](#ref-kimWhatNaturalizedEpistemology2008)).

The question that remains is this: if normativity is a necessary
component of epistemology and any comprehensive candidate theory of
human knowledge, where can it come from and how can it be justified to
rigorously establish decisions and practice? The issue at this point
intersects with the problems that arise in the philosophy of mind. How
do people (or any other organism, society, or community) make decisions,
and how do they distinguish right from wrong? We are bound to discuss
these issues using the so-called intentional vocabulary, i.e. based on
concepts such as beliefs, intentions, desires, etc. Therefore, if we
want to establish the normativity of epistemology we must find a way to
explain these concepts and how their meanings participate in the
phenomena that interest us.

What is certain is that modern epistemology has moved away from trying
to explain these phenomena in terms of formal logic like Logical
Positivism attempted ([Kitcher,
1992](#ref-kitcherNaturalistsReturn1992)). If we choose the scientific
approach, our theories will certainly be descriptive, at least in the
early stages ([Churchland,
1987](#ref-churchlandEpistemologyAgeNeuroscience1987)). But if the
intentional component of the mind can in principle be described by any
scientific theory that will take on the task, we can assume that we will
then be able to approach the question of which of the mediating
processes are reliable and which are the ones that provide correct
conclusions. And in this endeavour we can, possibly, find some support
from evolutionary theory ([Churchland,
1987](#ref-churchlandEpistemologyAgeNeuroscience1987); [Kitcher,
1992](#ref-kitcherNaturalistsReturn1992); [Quine,
1969](#ref-quineEpistemologyNaturalized1969); [Rosenberg,
1999](#ref-rosenbergNaturalisticEpistemologyEliminative1999)).

The human mind, insofar as it is a product of the human body, should be
considered the result of biological evolution. This does not mean, of
course, that the resulting picture will provide us with certainty
against epistemological skepticism. However, it can place the processes
that lead to knowledge in an evolutionary framework that will not
isolate purely human properties from the rest of the phylogenetic scale
while at the same time it will integrate them with the biological
constraints (ecological, physical, genetic, etc.) that characterize the
human species. We should, therefore, expect some degree of inherent
uncertainty and error introduced through those processes. The
identification of these weaknesses of the human mind is rather what
leads those who support the naturalistic approach to resist an *a
priori* consolidated depiction of human knowledge.

## Critical analysis

### The place of Quine’s work in modern epistemology

As we have already mentioned, Quine’s attempt was to salvage the legacy
of Logical Positivism, transforming as many aspects of it as he
considered problematic. The two main problems he focused on were the two
doctrines of empiricism, as he called them, the doctrine of analyticity
and the doctrine of reductionism. Instead, he proposes the psychological
study of how members of the linguistic community become a part of it and
how they interact, as replacements of analyticity and *a priori*
knowledge in general, and the doctrine of holism, which in the context
of scientific practice is implemented through the web of beliefs and
leads to the indeterminacy of translation.

Quine’s contribution is now considered by most philosophers to have been
instrumental in overthrowing the approach of Logical Positivism. The
foundation of *a priori* knowledge in a linguistic approach as
originally envisioned by Carnap could not succeed. Both Carnap himself
in his latest writings and Quine showed that. However, contrary to
Quine, not everyone agrees that the rejection of a foundation of
knowledge in formal logic negates the possibility of a reconstruction
based on any *a priori* conceptualization.

Some, therefore, disagree with Quine’s first dogma and the reduction of
meaning to the stimulation of our sensory receptors ([Friedman,
1997](#ref-friedmanPhilosophicalNaturalism1997); [Sober,
2000](#ref-soberQuineElliottSober2000)). Indeed, this approach carries
the flaws of Quine’s behaviourism. Moreover, although Quine’s exposition
convinces us that the concept of analyticity is vague no matter how it
is defined, it is insufficient to convince us that there can only be one
way to approach the issue ([Sober,
2000](#ref-soberQuineElliottSober2000)).

The dogma of holism appears to be less questionable. It is generally
accepted since Duhem’s time that no empirical observation can confirm a
theoretical hypothesis ([Losee, 2001, p.
150](#ref-loseeHistoricalIntroductionPhilosophy2001)) as in most cases
multiple auxiliary hypotheses are simultaneously tested together with
some basic assumptions. It can be argued, however, that Quine’s
epistemological holism does not follow from the premise. As the core
assumptions, logic and mathematics are not tested in each experiment
([Friedman, 1997](#ref-friedmanPhilosophicalNaturalism1997); [Sober,
2000](#ref-soberQuineElliottSober2000)). Even if Kant’s *a priori*
framework, or any other intuition we may have does not apply, some
preconditions of empirical science must always exist to serve as the
constitutional function that Kant, at least according to one reading,
had in mind ([Friedman,
1997](#ref-friedmanPhilosophicalNaturalism1997)).

What is certain is that Quine’s work in epistemology sparked a great
deal of debate about whether a naturalist epistemology is sound. We will
now turn to evaluating some of the suggestions that have been raised.

### Is a naturalistic epistemology possible?

Many philosophers followed Quine’s urge to include an empirical aspect
in epistemology, even if they do not fully agree with his analysis. As
we have seen, the contribution of evolutionary theory to this endeavour
is considered by many to be promising. We have to note here, in concert
with Kitcher ([Kitcher, 1992, p. 91](#ref-kitcherNaturalistsReturn1992),
footnote 97) that evolutionary thought can contribute to epistemology in
two ways: either as a theoretical framework that offers the required
credibility to the processes under question, or to give us the
theoretical model, analogously to biological evolution, through which a
theory of knowledge can be developed in formal terms.

Rosenberg believes that a naturalistic epistemology is bound to apply
evolutionary thought to explain the phenomenon of knowledge ([Rosenberg,
1999](#ref-rosenbergNaturalisticEpistemologyEliminative1999)). For him,
the result is a re-structuring of the debate and moving it away from a
search for truth –focusing on truth does not necessarily ensure
survival. On the other hand, framing the issue in terms of fitness and
reproductive success alone is not capable to illuminate all the
processes involved in the phenomenon. We can imagine conditions of
evolutionary pressure in which mental wealth arose accidentally or
indirectly, due to its relevance to other traits that provided an
evolutionary advantage. In particular, the mental framework that
supports knowledge could be an epiphenomenon, i.e. a result of random
drift and other non-selective forces that evolutionary theory has
identified. However, it is reasonable to think that traits such as
“logic”, which appear to play an important role in human ecology have
been favourably selected during our long evolution.

Nevertheless, evolutionary theory can only provide the general
theoretical background for articulating a comprehensive theory of
knowledge in the context of a naturalistic approach to epistemology. A
substantial part of the scientific burden should be borne by psychology
and related fields. Only through studies at this level can we identify
the possible functions for which our mental capabilities are destined.
Only after these functions are identified will we be able to produce a
comprehensive theory of human knowledge that respects our phylogenetic
course, the ecology of our species during its evolution, its ontogenetic
and developmental limitations, and the extent of the diversity of
relevant traits. At that point we will have reconstructed nature’s
mental vocabulary and we will be then able to reconstruct scientific
practice itself.

However, it should be noted that such an endeavour must simultaneously
spread across multiple levels of description, unlike the opportunistic
way science has moved so far ([Lewontin, 2001, p.
72](#ref-lewontinTripleHelixGene2001)).

At one level, for example, Stich ([Stich,
1993](#ref-stichNaturalizingEpistemologyQuine1993)) notes that
considerable differences between individuals are expected to be found in
the way that they manage available knowledge and scientific evidence to
form a scientific theory and this heterogeneity will vary with factors
such as education and other cultural characteristics. He, therefore,
suggests that epistemology should be interested in studying not how each
subject manages knowledge but rather how scientists who are most
efficient at it, do it. Even if Stich’s suggestion needs further
support, as he does not define how a method’s effectiveness will be
judged, his observation that individual differences have been so far
ignored is constructive. In fact, Stich is one of the few philosophers
who fully embraced Quine’s urge and actively collect data to feed their
philosophical analyses, e.g. ([Nichols et al.,
2003](#ref-nicholsMetaskepticismMeditationsEthnoepistemology2003)).

Another aspect that needs to be studied is the social dimension of
knowledge. Issues that Kitcher ([Kitcher,
1992](#ref-kitcherNaturalistsReturn1992)) identifies at this level are
the dissemination of knowledge through the existing web, the distinction
between personal and impersonal scientific goals, the management of
scientific disputes, and the recognition that subjects of knowledge may
also have non-epistemic goals. He considers these issues the subject of
the field of *social epistemology*. Issues such as the role of authority
in science and communication between proponents of opposing theories
posed by Kuhn ([Kuhn,
1996](#ref-kuhnStructureScientificRevolutions1996)) can in this context
be accessed through empirical science.

In an even greater context, naturalistic epistemology could study the
goals of science over time. Given that it is expected that those goals
cannot remain constant but change, empirical research may identify the
criteria by which they change. Whether one of those is realizability,
which Laudan rather reasonably concludes, or some other goal, it remains
to be determined through empirical research ([Freedman,
2006](#ref-freedmanNormativeNaturalismEpistemic2006)).

The above discussion demonstrates that a new meta-epistemological
movement is starting to develop inside modern epistemology, which aims
to study the whole spectrum of phenomena related to human knowledge. The
integration of all those perspectives in a unified theoretical approach
promises to provide a holistic description of the processes involved in
all related levels and their interactions.

Given that such a theoretical framework will have emerged through
empirical study, we should expect a certain degree of epistemological
relativism. Nevertheless, we will have reached a level of description
that encompasses all human activity related to the phenomena of
knowledge and science. The freedom of choosing between multiple
potential alternatives ways to approach phenomena related to knowledge
can only be regarded as an advantage. Since it is proven that any
rational reconstruction of knowledge will necessarily be impossible or
incoherent, any limits or constraints on our perception of the world and
our actions are bound to be arbitrary if they are not based on empirical
research.

Although such a presentation is not the subject of this work, efforts to
articulate such integrated theories exist. One such example is Damasio’s
theory of embodied cognition, specifically its account for the emergence
of consciousness ([Antonio R Damasio,
2000](#ref-antoniordamasioFeelingWhatHappens2000)). In addition,
philosophical conceptualization is progressively applied in the field of
Neuroscience, as much of the discussion revolves around how biological
systems can *learn* their environment through *prediction* and *control*
([Friston, 2010](#ref-fristonFreeenergyPrincipleUnified2010)), which
philosophers set as the goals of knowledge ([Kitcher,
1992](#ref-kitcherNaturalistsReturn1992); [Rosenberg,
1999](#ref-rosenbergNaturalisticEpistemologyEliminative1999)).

### Summary

As it has become apparent so far, Quine generated a wave of discussion
throughout the second half of the 20<sup>*t**h*</sup> century regarding
the foundations of epistemology. His main contribution was to identify
the impasses of Logical Positivism. We must emphasize that his criticism
focused on distinguishing between analytic and synthetic propositions.
Therefore his analysis cannot be considered condemning for any *a
priori* epistemology. Furthermore, Quine does not provide a convincing
reason to believe that “humans, branches, rocks, electrons, and
molecules are indeed real” ([Sosa, 1983, p.
68](#ref-sosaNatureUnmirroredEpistemology1983)). Essentially, he does
not state how naturalism is legitimized to claim that it delivers us the
world, if it cannot show that its theoretical objects are indeed part of
nature. Another severe limitation is the arbitrary way in which he
suggests who is entitled to practice naturalistic epistemology: why not
Kuhn or Piaget and even Chomsky with his universal grammar, which is
clearly against expunging the idea of a *a priori*. Finally, his
psychological approach to meaning and knowledge is purely
behaviouristic, and carries the weaknesses of that approach.

As we have noted before, one element that may be useful in the future is
the recognition of the non-scientific aspects of knowledge, which the
unbridled scientism of Quine and some proponents of the naturalistic
approach strikingly ignore. Ultimately, what is missing from modern
epistemology is a general framework that integrates all the knowledge
that the natural sciences produce. The intersection needed is to
construct a unified view of the cognitive and biological frames of
reference, together with the corresponding social and historical ones in
a perspective of human goals, transcending all levels of complexity of
the relevant phenomena. We have already stressed how important it is to
integrate this project into a more general evolutionary context at both
the ontogenetic and phylogenetic levels.

Taking on the task exemplifies the clash between two entire traditions
of explanatory models: the so-called causal-mechanistic and the holistic
([Salmon et al., 1992, pp.
33–34](#ref-salmonIntroductionPhilosophyScience1992)). In most cases,
empirical science tends to turn to the tradition of causal models. But
this view stems, I believe, from a short-sighted view of the
historiography of scientific practice. Although these models appear to
be the most widespread in scientific methodology, scientists often
resort to more holistic explanations, especially in times of crisis. I
believe that the present situation, with the attack of the natural
sciences on questions about the nature of mental phenomena, is one of
them.

We can argue that, to some extent, this struggle between the two
approaches, which very often coexist even in the same person, reflects
the more general relationship between philosophy and science.
Necessarily, rather, philosophy is oriented towards a more holistic
approach, while science towards the causal explanation of the phenomena
around us. To the extent that they both aim to make us more aware of the
world –including ourselves– their action should be complementary. At
stake in the Carnap-Quine controversy and the ensuing debate is whether
we should assign distinct roles to philosophy and science. It seems, at
first, that each has a distinct role, as philosophy deals with
conceptual analysis while science with the collection of empirical data.
But empirical science can not be carried out without philosophical
thought, and philosophy would be useless if it were developed to deal
with all possible worlds. Newton’s motivation to oppose Descartes’s
metaphysical natural science ([Losee, 2001, p.
93](#ref-loseeHistoricalIntroductionPhilosophy2001)) and the subsequent
influence of Newton’s work on Kant’s thought, as we have seen, most
clearly demonstrate this productive interaction.

If we want to tackle the question of the possibility of *a priori*
knowledge (and on any other issue, as far as I can see), we must, at
least first, use some conceptualization. It is only through an existing
conceptualization that we can discuss any issue in the first place. The
development of centuries of philosophy offers us such a
conceptualization.

But it is to be expected –and human– that any conceptualization can be
wrong. For example, although centuries of empirical research have
confirmed the existence of an innate conception of space presupposed by
Kant ([Moser et al., 2008](#ref-moserPlaceCellsGrid2008); [Palmer &
Lynch, 2010](#ref-palmerKantianViewSpace2010)), it seems that it has
defining properties that could not be accessible at the time Kant wrote
([Wills et al., 2010](#ref-willsDevelopmentHippocampalCognitive2010)).
More recently, Putnam ([Putnam, 1982](#ref-putnamWhyReasonCan1982))
argues that force fields, brown objects, and dispositions are three
non-reducing things or properties. Today we know that he is wrong on
brown objects, we have some theoretical models of how to describe fields
in more simple terms ([Witten,
2005](#ref-wittenUnravellingStringTheory2005)) and some indications that
something similar could be true of the dispositional component of the
mind. So I would say that we are obliged to use the best
conceptualization that philosophy and philosophical thought, in general,
offer us each time. However, if we want to make existing
conceptualizations clearer and thus of more use, we must put it to every
available test. The scientific methodology is, to date, the best process
we have to test compatibility with the real world. Our best knowledge
will always be after the fact. Concepts and explanations will be
mutually reshaped through their interaction.

After all, does science give us a realistic view of the world? The
proponent of the naturalistic approach will ask: in relation to which
reality? The theory of evolution suggests that there are almost as many
ways of seeing (sic) the world as there are different species, and the
cognitive sciences that considerable diversity may exist even among
individuals of the same species. For our species, the part of common
sense that has developed to the point that it has acquired
self-awareness, as Quine describes science, is that which appears to
display the most potential for describing to us the world. We must use
its findings with due respect for its limitations and specifications, at
the cost of continually reviewing its results and by taking all the
other virtues that make science possible as given.

The relativism stemming from a scientific inquiry of epistemology’s
foundations should not frighten us. The diversity of the subjects’
traits, their societies and their history should be taken for granted
and should not be obscured. Only through deliberate study along the
lines we have outlined can a continued reconstruction of the related
phenomena’s useful features be produced. Such an empirical
reconstruction will help us become more and more aware of our structural
relations with the world and the ways in which we interact. Our species
stands out through our ability to reflect on our own history over long
periods of time, both individually and collectively. We must pursue
opportunities for reflection by every means at the disposal of the human
mind. Although all this may sound idealized, we can not afford to leave
it to chance. A well-defined dividing line between philosophy and
science is of no use –only the synthetic adoption of their guidelines by
each individual can help us move forward.

> I want to pause and meditate for a while on this new knowledge of
> mine, fixing it more deeply in my memory.

([Descartes, 1614](#ref-descartesMeditationsFirstPhilosophy1614), Second
Meditation, p. 8)

> I am afraid that my peaceful sleep may be followed by hard labour when
> I wake, and that I shall have to struggle not in the light but in the
> imprisoning darkness of the problems I have raised.

([Descartes, 1614](#ref-descartesMeditationsFirstPhilosophy1614), First
Meditation, p. 3)

## References

Antonio R Damasio. (2000). *The feeling of what happens*. Harcourt Inc.
<http://archive.org/details/feelingofwhathap00dama_0>

Carnap, R. (1950). Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology. *Revue
Internationale de Philosophie 4*, 20–40.

Churchland, P. S. (1987). Epistemology in the Age of Neuroscience. In
*The Journal of Philosophy* (No. 10; Vol. 84, pp. 544–553).
https://www.pdcnet.org/pdc/bvdb.nsf/purchase?openform&fp=jphil&id=jphil\_1987\_0084\_0010\_0544\_0553.
<https://doi.org/10.5840/jphil1987841026>

Descartes, R. (1614). *Meditations on First Philosophy in which are
demonstrated the existence of God and the distinction between the human
soul and body* (J. Bennett, Trans.).

Dowden, B. (2020). Fallacies. *Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.

Fieser, J. (2011). Hume: Metaphysical and Epistemological Theories.
*Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.

Freedman, K. L. (2006). Normative Naturalism and Epistemic Relativism.
*International Studies in the Philosophy of Science*, *20*(3), 309–322.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/02698590600960952>

Friedman, M. (1997). Philosophical Naturalism. *Proceedings and
Addresses of the American Philosophical Association*, *71*(2), 5+7–21.
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/3130938>

Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory?
*Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, *11*(2), 127–138.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787>

Haack, S. (1993). The two faces of Quine’s naturalism. *Synthese*,
*94*(3), 335–356. <https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01064484>

Hylton, P., & Kemp, G. (2020). Willard Van Orman Quine. In E. N. Zalta
(Ed.), *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Spring 2020).
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Kim, J. (2008). What Is "Naturalized Epistemology"? In *Epistemology: An
Anthology*. John Wiley & Sons.

Kitcher, P. (1992). The Naturalists Return. *The Philosophical Review*,
*101*(1), 53. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2185044>

Kuhn, T. S. (1996). *The structure of scientific revolutions* (3rd ed).
University of Chicago Press.

Lewontin, R. C. (2001). *The Triple Helix: Gene, Organism, and
Environment*. Harvard University Press.
<https://books.google.com?id=otKbHE8OFy4C>

Losee, J. (2001). *A Historical Introduction to the Philosophy of
Science* (Fourth Edition). Oxford University Press.

McCormick, M. (2020). Immanuel Kant: metaphysics. *Internet Encyclopedia
of Philosophy*.

Moser, E. I., Kropff, E., & Moser, M.-B. (2008). Place Cells, Grid
Cells, and the Brain’s Spatial Representation System. *Annual Review of
Neuroscience*, *31*(1), 69–89.
<https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090723>

Nichols, S., Stich, S., & Weinberg, J. M. (2003). Metaskepticism:
Meditations in Ethnoepistemology. In S. Luper (Ed.), *The Skeptics* (pp.
227–247). Ashgate.

Palmer, L., & Lynch, G. (2010). A Kantian View of Space. *Science*,
*328*(5985), 1487–1488. <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1191527>

Papineau, D. (2020). Naturalism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), *The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Summer 2020). Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University.

Putnam, H. (1982). Why Reason Can’t Be Naturalized. *Synthese*, *52*(1),
3–23. <https://www.jstor.org/stable/20115757>

Quine, W. V. (1951). Two Dogmas of Empiricism. *The Philosophical
Review*, *60*(1), 20. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2181906>

Quine, W. V. (1960). *Word and object* (New edition). MIT Press.

Quine, W. V. (1969). Epistemology Naturalized. In *Ontological
Relativity and Other Essays*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Rosenberg, A. (1996). A Field Guide to Recent Species of Naturalism.
*The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science*, *47*(1), 1–29.

Rosenberg, A. (1999). Naturalistic Epistemology for Eliminative
Materialists. *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research*, *59*(2),
335–358. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2653675>

Salmon, M. H., Earman, J., Lennox, J. G., Machamer, P., Glymour, C. N.,
Salmon, W. C., McGuire, J. E., Norton, J. D., & Schqffner, K. F. (Eds.).
(1992). *Introduction to the Philosophy of Science*. Prentice Hall.

Sinclair, R. (2020). Willard Van Orman Quine: Philosophy of Science.
*Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.

Sober, E. (2000). Quine: Elliott Sober. *Aristotelian Society
Supplementary Volume*, *74*(1), 237–280.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8349.00071>

Sosa, E. (1983). Nature unmirrored, epistemology naturalized.
*Synthese*, *55*(1), 49–72. <https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00485373>

Stich, S. (1993). Naturalizing Epistemology: Quine, Simon and the
Prospects for Pragmatism. *Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement*,
*34*, 1–17. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246100002435>

Stroud, B. (1996). The Charm of Naturalism. *Proceedings and Addresses
of the American Philosophical Association*, *70*(2), 43.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/3131038>

Wills, T. J., Cacucci, F., Burgess, N., & O’Keefe, J. (2010).
Development of the Hippocampal Cognitive Map in Preweanling Rats.
*Science*, *328*(5985), 1573–1576.
<https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1188224>

Witten, E. (2005). Unravelling string theory. *Nature*, *438*(7071,
7071), 1085–1085. <https://doi.org/10.1038/4381085a>
